Chair of Machine Learning and Reasoning
(Computer Science 6)
RWTH AACHEN UNIVERSITY

Master Thesis Proposal

Semantic Partitioning for Partially Observable
Deterministic Task and Motion Planning

Hani Alassiri Alhabboub
September 29, 2025

Abstract

This research proposal outlines a plan to extend Partially Observable Deterministic
(POD) planning methods to the domain of Task and Motion Planning (TAMP)
under partial observability. Existing TAMP frameworks often assume full observ
ability or rely on computationally intensive probabilistic models. This project
addresses the challenge of modeling belief states over object locations in continu
ous 3D spaces. The central idea is to construct an abstract belief model grounded
in Semantic Boxels—task-relevant Cuboids that serve as the foundation for be
lief representation—enabling POD planning to reason about spatial uncertainty
without requiring exhaustive discretization. The proposed methodology formally
integrates this semantic abstraction with a PDDLStream-based TAMP framework,
leveraging its stream mechanism to ground symbolic plans in continuous geo
metric domains. The expected contribution is a scalable and conceptually simple
framework that simplifies planning under spatial uncertainty for robotic systems,
enabling them to perform complex tasks involving information gathering and
robust manipulation in partially known environments.

1 Introduction

Robotic systems are increasingly envisioned to operate autonomously in complex, dynamic, and
human-centric environments, performing tasks that demand both long-horizon reasoning and
intricate physical interaction. To enable such capabilities, Task and Motion Planning (TAMP)
has emerged as a critical area of research [5, 8]. TAMP addresses the fundamental challenge of
connecting high-level symbolic task specifications (e.g., ”fetch the blue cup from the kitchen”)

1

1 Introduction

with the low-level, continuous motions a robot must perform to execute those tasks in the real
world. TAMP combines discrete task planning with continuous motion planning: symbolic
planners generate high-level sequences of abstract actions—what is known as a task plan.
However, symbolic planning alone is insufficient for real-world robotic execution. Due to
necessary abstractions, there exists a significant gap between these abstract plans and the
physical realities of robot operation. Specifically, we must determine whether the proposed
symbolic actions are feasible within the robot’s continuous geometric and kinematic constraints,
and if so, identify the concrete parameters required to execute them—such as object poses,
grasp configurations, and collision-free trajectories. For instance, a symbolic instruction like
(pick A) is only viable if object A is actually reachable, graspable, and a feasible motion exists
to carry out the action. Bridging this gap demands specialized mechanisms to ground symbolic
plans in continuous state and action spaces.

To this end, various methods have been developed, among which PDDLStream [8] has become
a widely used framework. PDDLStream extends the classical Planning Domain Definition
Language (PDDL) [1] by incorporating streams—lazily-evaluated, declarative procedures that
can interface with external solvers. These streams are capable of generating or validating
continuous parameters on demand, allowing the symbolic planner to retrieve geometric or
kinematic information only as needed. This simplifies the coupling between high-level symbolic
reasoning (what to do) and low-level geometric feasibility (how to do it), making the planning
process both flexible and efficient.

Despite its effectiveness, the original PDDLStream framework assumes full observability and
deterministic action outcomes—strong assumptions that limit its applicability in realistic,
real-world settings. In practice, robots frequently operate under partial observability, due to
occlusions, limited sensor coverage, or dynamically changing environments. In such settings,
crucial information—such as the location of a target object or the presence of an obstacle—may
be initially unknown, necessitating active information gathering as part of task execution.

Addressing this limitation is the central focus of this thesis: extending PDDLStream to operate
under partial observability. This includes the ability to represent and reason over belief states
that capture uncertainty in continuous spatial variables. Naive representations—such as
uniform voxelizations of 3D space—can quickly become computationally intractable, leading
to an explosion in the size of the belief space. Effective solutions must therefore strike a balance
between expressivity and computational efficiency in belief representation and planning. The
core research question is: How can we formally define and integrate a belief representation based
on semantic partitioning into a POD-TAMP framework? Here, we proposes a novel approach
to discretizing the workspace based on perceived objects and the occluded regions they form.
This is done by introducing Semantic Boxels—task-relevant, adaptively generated Cuboids—as
the foundation for belief representation. Instead of a dense, uniform discretization, Semantic
Boxels are dynamically created based on perceived objects (using their known 3D models) and

2

2 Background

the occluded regions they form, thereby providing a structured and scalable way to represent
and reason about spatial uncertainty.

This thesis aims to develop a system where a robot, facing uncertainty about object locations, can
plan and execute a sequence of information-gathering and manipulation actions as needed. It
will reason over abstract beliefs about which Boxels objects might occupy, using PDDLStream to
connect this reasoning to its continuous perception and action capabilities. The expected result
is a framework that simplifies planning under spatial uncertainty, enhancing robot autonomy
and robustness in complex, partially known environments. This proposal is structured as
follows: Section 2 provides essential background information on classical planning, reasoning
under uncertainty, and specific frameworks like PDDLStream that are foundational to this work.
Section 3 then reviews related work in TAMP under partial observability, belief representation,
and relevant planning paradigms. Section 4 details the proposed methodology, including the
formalization of Boxels through adaptive semantic voxelization, the Semantic POD-TAMP
model, and the PDDLStream integration. Finally, Section 5 describes the plan for evaluating our
framework and concludes the proposal by outlining the expected contributions and significance
of the research.

2 Background

This chapter covers the foundational concepts in AI planning, state representation, reasoning
under uncertainty, and the relevant frameworks used in this thesis.

2.1 AI Planning Fundamentals

Artificial Intelligence (AI) planning is concerned with the autonomous generation of a sequence
of actions, or a plan, to achieve a specified goal from a given initial state [10].

2.1.1 State-Space Models in Classical Planning

The formal basis for classical planning problems is a state-space model [9, 10, 13]. Conceptually,
a state-space model explicitly defines all possible configurations of the world and how actions
transform one configuration into another.

More formally, a deterministic state-space model can be described as a tuple S = ⟨S, s0, SG, Act, A, f⟩,
where:

• S: A set representing all possible states the world can be in. For example, in a simple
blocksworld problem with two blocks A and B and a table, a state could be ”Block A is
on Block B, and Block B is on the table, and the robot hand is empty.”
• s0 ∈ S: The specific initial state from which planning begins. E.g., ”Block A is on the
table, Block B is on the table, hand empty.”

3

2 Background

• SG ⊆ S: The set of goal states. Any state in this set satisfies the desired objective. E.g.,
any state where ”Block A is on Block B.”
• Act: A set of all possible actions the agent can perform. E.g., pick blockX, stack blockX on
blockY.
• A(s) ⊆ Act: A function that, for any given state s ∈ S, returns the subset of actions from
Act that are applicable (can be executed) in state s. For example, pick blockA is applicable
only if Block A is clear (nothing on top of it) and the robot hand is empty.
• f(a, s) → s': A deterministic state transition function. Given a state s and an applicable
action a ∈ A(s), f(a, s) returns the unique successor state s' that results from executing
action a in state s. For example, if s is ”A on table, B on table, hand empty” and a is pick
blockA, then s' = f(a, s) would be ”B on table, hand holding A.”

A solution or plan is then a sequence of actions σ = [a0, a1, ... , an] such that if si is the state
before action ai, then ai ∈ A(si), si+1 = f(ai, si), and the final state sn+1 is in SG. Often, we
are interested in an optimal plan, which could be the shortest sequence of actions or one that
minimizes some associated cost.

Compact Representation: STRIPS, and PDDL Explicitly enumerating all possible states
S is infeasible for all but the simplest problems. Therefore, planning problems are typically
described in a more compact, factored representation using a planning language. In this
representation, a state is defined by a set of propositions (or ground atoms) that are currently
true.

A foundational language for this is STRIPS (Stanford Research Institute Problem Solver)
[6]. In STRIPS:

• States are represented as sets of true propositions (e.g., (on A B), (ontable B),
(hand-empty) ).
• Actions are defined by:
– Preconditions: A set of propositions that must be true in the current state for the
action to be applicable.
– Effects: Specified as two lists:

Add-list: A set of propositions that become true after the action is executed.

Delete-list: A set of propositions that become false (are no longer true) after the
action.
• The transition function f(a, s) is implicitly defined: the new state s' is obtained by taking
state s, removing all propositions in the delete-list of a, and then adding all propositions
in the add-list of a.
• The initial state (s0) is a set of initially true propositions, and the goal (SG) is specified by
a set of propositions that must be true in any goal state.

4

2 Background

The Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) [1] builds upon and extends the
STRIPS representation, providing a more expressive and standardized syntax for a wider range
of classical planning problems. In PDDL:

• Domain File defines:
– Types: Categories for objects (e.g., block, robot).
– Predicates: Relations or properties (e.g., (on ?x - block ?y - block)).
– Action Schemas: Templates for actions, generalizing STRIPS operators. For instance:

1 (:action stack
2 :parameters (?obj1 - block ?obj2 - block)
3 :precondition (and (holding ?obj1) (clear ?obj2))
4 :effect (and (on ?obj1 ?obj2) (not (holding ?obj1))
5 (not (clear ?obj2)) (hand-empty) (clear
?obj1))
6 )

Here, (not (holding ?obj1)) is part of the delete-list, and (on ?obj1 ?obj2)
is part of the add-list in STRIPS terms.
• Problem File specifies:
– Objects: Specific objects (e.g., A, B, C - block).
– Initial State (Init): Ground atoms true at the start.
– Goal (G): Ground atoms that must be true in a goal state.

A PDDL problem P = ⟨Domain, Instance⟩ thus compactly encodes the state model S(P).
Ground actions (action schemas with parameters replaced by specific objects) form the set
Act. More advanced PDDL versions also support features beyond STRIPS, such as conditional
effects ((when <condition> <effect>)), numeric fluents, and axioms (derived predicates).

2.2 Planning under Partial Observability

Classical planning’s assumption of full observability is often violated in robotics. When an
agent has incomplete information about the true state of the world, it must reason about its
belief state.

2.2.1 Belief States and K-Literals

A belief state represents the agent’s current set of possible world states consistent with its
history of actions and observations. In Partially Observable Deterministic (POD) planning [2,
4], the world itself behaves deterministically, but the agent’s knowledge is incomplete. The
belief state b is explicitly a set of possible states. Actions transition this set, and observations
prune it. A common way to reason about knowledge in POD planning is through K-literals [3].
K-literals make the robot’s knowledge about a proposition p explicit. For example:

• K(p) signifies ”p is known to be true.”

5

2 Background

• K(¬p) signifies ”p is known to be false.”

If neither holds, p is uncertain. p is ”possibly true” if K(¬p) is false. POD problems can often
be compiled into classical planning problems using these K-literals, allowing classical planners
to find plans that achieve a state of knowledge (e.g., K(goal_achieved)).

2.2.2 Probabilistic vs. Deterministic Partial Observability

It is important to distinguish POD planning from Partially Observable Markov Decision Pro
cesses (POMDPs) planning [15], particularly as our approach will be compared with existing
POMDP-based TAMP solutions. In POMDPs, the world is modeled as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) with probabilistic transitions and observations, and the belief state is a proba
bility distribution over world states. While highly expressive, POMDPs are computationally
very demanding. POD planning, by assuming deterministic (though unknown) outcomes and
deterministic observations, offers a more tractable framework for many robotic scenarios where
the primary uncertainty stems from lack of knowledge rather than inherent stochasticity of
well-modeled actions.

2.3 Task and Motion Planning (TAMP)

Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) connects high-level task goals with a robot’s actual physical
movements [7]. The core problem is ensuring that a plan is physically possible. High-level
planners often ignore geometry, leading to plans that seem correct but can’t be executed. Yet,
including all geometric details from the start makes the problem too complex to solve. This
challenge of combining high-level logic with real-world geometry is why TAMP is an active
research area, with frameworks like PDDLStream being developed to bridge the gap.

2.3.1 PDDLStream for TAMP

PDDLStream [8] is a prominent and flexible TAMP framework designed to bridge this symbolic
continuous gap. It extends the classical Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) by
introducing the core concept of streams.

Streams: Declarative Procedures for Continuous Parameters A stream in PDDLStream
is a procedure that generates or tests values for continuous parameters required by symbolic
actions. These parameters might include object poses, robot configurations, grasp transforma
tions, or motion trajectories. Streams have both a procedural and a declarative component:

• Procedural Component (Conditional Generator): This is the actual code (e.g., a
Python function) that, given some input values (which can be discrete symbols or other
continuous values), produces a (potentially infinite) sequence of output values. For
example, an inverse kinematics (IK) stream, given an object, its target pose, and a grasp,

6

2 Background

would generate a sequence of robot configurations that achieve that end-effector pose. A
collision-checking stream, given a trajectory, would test if it’s collision-free.
• Declarative Component (Stream Specification): This part is described in a PDDL-like
syntax and informs the symbolic planner what the stream does, what inputs it requires,
what outputs it produces, and, crucially, what logical conditions (fluents) are associated
with these inputs and outputs. This specification includes:
– :inputs: The typed parameters the stream procedure takes.
– :domain: A set of PDDL facts (preconditions) that must be true for the stream to
be applicable for a given set of inputs. For example, an IK stream might require
that a valid pose and grasp for the object are already known.
– :outputs: The typed parameters that the stream procedure generates.
– :certified: A set of PDDL facts that are guaranteed to be true if the stream
successfully produces a set of outputs for given inputs. These ”certified fluents”
are added to the planner’s state and represent new knowledge derived from the
continuous domain. For instance, if an IK stream successfully finds a configuration
?q for picking object ?obj at pose ?p with grasp ?g, it might certify the fluent
(kinematics-sol ?obj ?p ?g ?q).

PDDLStream employs a lazy evaluation strategy. Streams are not called exhaustively before
hand; instead, the symbolic planner calls them ”on-demand” when it encounters an action
whose preconditions require a continuous parameter to be instantiated or a continuous condi
tion to be tested.

Example PDDLStream Workflow Consider a symbolic action (pick ?obj ?p ?g ?q
?t) (pick object ?obj from pose ?p using grasp ?g via configuration ?q along trajectory ?t).
For this action to be applicable:

A stream might first be called to sample a stable ?p for ?obj on a surface. If successful,
it certifies (AtPose ?obj ?p).

Then, another stream samples a grasp ?g for ?obj. If successful, it certifies (Grasp ?obj
?g).

An IK stream then takes ?obj, ?p, ?g as input and tries to find a robot configuration
?q. If successful, it certifies (KinSolution ?obj ?p ?g ?q).

Finally, a motion planning stream takes the current configuration and ?q as input to find
a collision-free trajectory ?t, certifying (Motion ?q_start ?t ?q).

Only if all these streams succeed and certify their respective fluents will the preconditions of
the symbolic (pick ...) action be met.

The overall PDDLStream algorithm often reduces a TAMP problem to a sequence of finite
PDDL problems, iteratively calling streams to discover more certified fluents until a com

7

2 Background

plete, grounded plan is found. The original PDDLStream framework, however, was primarily
designed for fully observable and deterministic settings.

2.4 Spatial Representation for Robotic Planning

For robotic agents interacting with the physical world, a critical component is how the con
tinuous, often 3D, environment and the objects within it are represented. This representation
underpins both motion planning (navigating and avoiding collisions) and task planning (rea
soning about object interactions and achieving goals). The challenge of spatial representation
becomes even more acute under partial observability, where the robot must represent not just
what is known, but also what is unknown or uncertain about the environment.

2.4.1 Discretization of Continuous Space

Robots operate in continuous spaces, but many planning algorithms, particularly at the sym
bolic level, reason over discrete states or abstractions. Therefore, methods to discretize or
abstract continuous spatial information are essential.

Voxel Grids and Octrees A common approach to represent 3D environments is to discretize
them into a grid of uniform volumetric pixels, or voxels. Each voxel can store information, such
as whether it is occupied, free, or unknown. While straightforward, uniform voxel grids can be
memory-intensive and computationally expensive for large environments or high resolutions.

Octrees 2.4.1 [14, 18] offer a more efficient hierarchical data structure for representing 3D
space. An Octree is a tree data structure where each internal node has exactly eight children.
It starts with a single large voxel encompassing the entire space of interest. If this voxel is not
homogeneous (e.g., it contains both free and occupied space), it is recursively subdivided into
eight smaller child voxels (octants).

Figure 1: Example of an octree storing free (shaded white) and occupied (black) cells. The
volumetric model is shown on the left and the corresponding tree representation on
the right.

This subdivision continues until voxels are homogeneous or a minimum resolution/maximum
depth is reached. This process creates a tree where large, uniform regions (whether free,

8

3 Related Work

occupied, or unknown) are represented by single nodes at a shallower depth, making it highly
efficient for representing sparse environments in comparison to uniform grid voxelization. The
OctoMap framework [14] uses this principle to build probabilistic 3D occupancy maps from
noisy sensor data. In such a framework, unobservable space is typically represented implicitly
by the absence of nodes in a given volume; querying such a region returns an ”unknown”
status.

Sidd’s Critical Regions To make planning more efficient, space can be divided based on
task-relevant meaning rather than uniform geometric criteria. One such approach is the
concept of Critical Regions (CRs) as introduced by Siddharth Srivastava. [20]. Those CRs
are learned sub-regions of the configuration space where important features—such as success
rates of controllers, object visibility, or transition likelihoods—change significantly between
those regions.

In Sidd’s approach, these regions are identified using labeled data from motion planning
problems, where demonstrations or sampled plans reveal which parts of the space are essential
for solving tasks. Once identified, a region-based Voronoi diagram (RBVD) is used to partition
the configuration space around the CRs: each point is assigned to the nearest critical region,
forming abstract states. Transitions between these abstract states define abstract actions,
forming the backbone for hierarchical planning. By focusing computation on these task
relevant regions, this approach allows for more scalable and efficient planning, but is limited
to static and pre-defined regions with labeled data.

Our work combines these techniques, as explained in Section 4.

3 Related Work

Solving TAMP problems is hard, especially when a robot only has partial information. This
section reviews previous work on this topic, focusing on planning approaches and methods for
representing a robot’s beliefs about the world. We examine the limitations of current methods
to provide context for our work.

3.1 TAMP under Partial Observability

Existing approaches to TAMP under partial observability generally either use formal, proba
bilistic models or more ad-hoc, reactive methods, or a combination of both.

3.1.1 POMDP-based TAMP Solutions

Several works formulate TAMP under uncertainty as a POMDP to formally handle uncertainty
and find optimal plans [5, 12, 19]. TAMPURA [5], for example, makes this approach more
tractable by learning a simplified, abstract model of the problem. The planner then chooses

9

3 Related Work

from a library of pre-defined controllers to create high-level plans that are robust to uncertainty
and can gather information when needed. However, a persistent challenge is the representation
of belief over continuous properties, particularly object poses. Implementations often resort
to particle filters over dense voxel grids to approximate these continuous belief states [5, 11],
which is does not scale well to large environments.

3.1.2 Partially Grounded Plans in TAMP

In contrast to formal probabilistic models, other TAMP systems handle uncertainty by deferring
it to execution [17]. These methods generate partially grounded plans, leaving ”gaps” for actions
with unknown outcomes. During execution, specialized reactive controllers attempt to fill
these gaps. If a controller fails, the failure is treated as a new constraint, and the system replans.
This reactive approach avoids the need to model outcome probabilities explicitly. However,
because it does not reason about uncertainty proactively, it can struggle with problems that
require multi-step, strategic information gathering, such as deciding which of several actions
is most likely to reveal a hidden object.

3.1.3 Modern Approaches to TAMP under Uncertainty

Recent works have leveraged learning and large models to address partial observability, offering
different strategies than our own.

One approach adds high-level strategic reasoning on top of standard planners to handle real
world messiness. For instance, Ma et al. [16] first reason backward from a vague goal to decide
which objects are important (Task-level Backward Search), and then use a constraint graph to
find a safe order to move objects in a cluttered scene (Object Manipulation Constraint Graph).
Our approach is more fundamental. Instead of adding a separate strategic layer, we introduce
a new geometric belief representation, Boxels. This allows our planner to reason directly about
what it can and cannot see, integrating information-gathering into the core planning process
rather than treating it as a separate, pre-planning step.

Another approach uses large foundation models to interpret scenes. Zhao et al. [21], for instance,
use a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to look at an image and directly answer questions for the
planner, like ”Is the drawer empty?”. This replaces traditional perception modules with a black
box model. Our method, in contrast, builds a structured 3D model of the world from sensor
data. This geometric grounding provides a more robust and transparent basis for reasoning
about space and occlusion, which is critical for reliable manipulation, as it avoids the potential
inconsistencies of VLM-based perception.

Finally, some methods move away from symbolic planning altogether and instead use end-to
end learning. Bai et al. [bai2025learning], for example, train a system that learns a policy for
where to move the camera to get an informative view before acting (Task-Aware View Planning

10

3 Related Work

or TAVP). This is fundamentally different from our model-based approach, where looking
around is not a learned reflex but an explicit action chosen by the planner because its world
model indicates that knowledge is missing. Because our method separates planning from
execution, it is more transparent and can be applied to new goals and environments without
needing to be retrained.

3.2 Spatial Belief Representation in TAMP

In a typical TAMP cycle the planner (i) reasons symbolically over high-level actions (pick, place,
move-to-region), (ii) instantiates them with continuous parameters using a motion planner, (iii)
executes the resulting trajectory, observes the environment, and (iv) updates its belief before
the next planning step. Every one of these phases depends critically on how we represent
spatial belief. While general methods were introduced in Section 2.4, their application in TAMP
reveals important limitations.

3.2.1 Limitations of Geometric Discretization for POD-TAMP

Octrees: The efficiency of Octrees makes them a particularly useful tool for 3D mapping.
While an Octree framework like OctoMap [14] can represent unobserved space, its primary
purpose is to efficiently model occupancy based on noisy sensor measurements. For the task
of planning to find hidden objects, it has two key limitations:

Lack of Semantic Structure: Standard Octree subdivision is purely geometric and
based on occupancy variance. It does not create semantically meaningful regions corre
sponding to, for example, ”the volume occluded by object A”. The planner would have to
infer this semantic meaning from the raw geometric data, which is a complex task in
itself.

Object Integrity: The recursive subdivision of an Octree can arbitrarily split a single
physical object into multiple voxels at different tree depths. This complicates reasoning
about objects as whole entities, which is essential for manipulation planning (e.g., ”pick
up object A,” not ”pick up voxels 1, 2, and 5 of object A”).

3.2.2 Limitations of Global Semantic Abstractions

Sidd’s Critical Regions (CRs): The method proposed in [20] for learning a global set of
task-relevant Critical Regions (CRs) offers a semantically grounded framework for abstracting
planning challenges. However, in dynamic manipulation scenarios involving specific objects,
this global and often static partitioning may prove inadequate. For example, the region de
scribed as ”behind object A” is inherently tied to the current perceived pose of object A and the
robot’s perspective. A pre-defined or globally fixed CR map struggles to accommodate such
dynamic, object-specific uncertainties.

11

4 Approach

4 Approach

This chapter details the proposed methodology for integrating a novel spatial abstraction,
Boxels, into a Partially Observable Deterministic (POD) Task and Motion Planning (TAMP)
framework built upon PDDLStream. The approach aims to create a tractable yet expressive
system for planning under spatial uncertainty.

4.1 Overview

The main idea of our methodology is to link abstract belief representation with continuous
geometric reasoning. This is done through three key components:

Adaptive Semantic Discretization: A dynamic procedure for partitioning the robot’s
workspace into a set of meaningful Semantic Boxels, i.e. semantically meaningful sub
spaces, based on perception and known object models.

A Formal POD-TAMP Model: A formal model that uses these Boxels as the foundation
for its state representation, allowing a POD planner to reason about knowledge and
uncertainty regarding object locations and unobstructed spaces.

PDDLStream Integration: A concrete implementation using custom PDDL fluents,
actions, and streams to realize the formal model within the PDDLStream framework.
This is done by defining PDDL fluents and actions that operate on the belief state over
Boxels.

4.2 Adaptive Semantic Discretization: Generating Boxels

To create a spatial abstraction that is both meaningful and scalable, we propose a process of
adaptive semantic discretization. This process dynamically generates a set of Semantic Boxels
(B X set) by partitioning the workspace based on perceived objects and the occlusions they create.
This process will be managed by PDDLStream procedures, as illustrated in Figure 4.2.

12

4 Approach

Figure 2: Adaptive Semantic Voxelization Process. (a) Initial scene with robot viewpoint and
objects. (b) Objects are bounded by dedicated Boxels. (c) Occlusion regions are calcu
lated and defined as new Boxels. (d) Remaining free space is recursively partitioned
into Free Space Boxels.

The generation process is as follows:

Object-Centric Bounding: When an object (e.g., objk) is detected, a dedicated Boxel is
generated to be a tight bounding box around its perceived pose. This uses the object’s
known 3D model to define the volume. This isolates known objects into distinct spatial
regions. This is done by generating a cuboid that fully contains the object’s 3D model.

Occlusion-Aware Subdivision: For each object-bounding Boxel, the space occluded
by it (from the robot’s current or potential viewpoints) is calculated and designated as
a new, distinct Boxel. This is critical as it explicitly represents currently unobservable
regions, making them first-class citizens for information-gathering actions.

Recursive Partitioning: The remaining free space is then recursively partitioned. If a
new partition is observed to be empty, subdivision stops. If new objects are found within
a partition, the process repeats: bound the biggest object and define its occluded space.
This continues until a minimum Boxel size is reached or no new objects are detected.

This adaptive, object-centric approach contrasts with octrees and uniform voxel grids by fo
cusing discretization effort on task-relevant areas—the objects themselves and the occluded
spaces they create. Each generated Boxel is assigned a unique ID and has associated geometric
data, accessible to the planner via PDDL fluents.

13

4 Approach

4.3 Semantic POD-TAMP Model Definition

We formalize our Semantic POD-TAMP system using a model taken from the work of Bonet
and Geffner [4]. The model is a tuple:

M = ⟨S, S0, SG, A, f, O⟩

where:

• S (States): A finite set of abstract states. Each state is a consistent assignment of truth
values to a set of atomic propositions AP built from K-literals (see Chapter 2). These
propositions are grounded in the Boxel representation, e.g., K(InBoxel(objk, Boxelj)).
• S0 (Initial States): The set of possible initial abstract states, representing the initial
belief b0.
• SG (Goal States): The set of goal states to be reached with certainty, specified by a logical
formula over AP (e.g., K(holding(target_obj))).
• A (Actions): A set of abstract actions defined as PDDLStream action schemas that oper
ate on the belief state, such as ‘sense_Boxel_for_object‘ or ‘pick_object_from_known_Boxel‘.
• f (Transition Function): A deterministic state-transition function s' = f(a, s) that
computes the successor abstract state based on an action’s effects on the K-literals.
• O (Sensor Model): An observation function that maps a belief state and an action to an
abstract observation (e.g., ‘found_target‘, ‘not_found_target‘), which is used to update
the belief state.

The planning problem is to find a sequence of actions from A that drives the belief state,
initially b0 = S0, to a belief state bg where all possible states are goal states (i.e., bg ⊆ SG).

4.4 PDDLStream Integration

To illustrate how this model can be implemented, we can define a set of PDDL-like fluents and
PDDLStream-style actions that operate on the belief state over Boxels. This is not a complete
implementation, but it should give an idea of how the model can be used.

4.4.1 PDDL Fluents for Belief Representation

The agent’s knowledge is represented directly in the PDDL state using K-literals. Uncertainty
is implicitly handled by the absence of knowledge.

1 (:predicates
2 ; --- Boxel Descriptors ---
3 (semantic_zone ?b - Boxel_id) ; Predicate for all defined Boxels
4
5 ; --- Object Location Knowledge (K-literals) ---
6 (obj_in_Boxel ?o - object ?b - Boxel_id)

14

4 Approach

7 ; K(InBoxel(?o, ?b)): Known that ?o is in ?b.
8 (obj_not_in_Boxel ?o - object ?b - Boxel_id)
9 ; K(not InBoxel(?o, ?b)): Known that ?o is NOT in ?b.
10 ; "Possibly in ?b" would mean that (not (obj_not_in_Boxel ?o ?b)) is true, i.e.
we don't know for sure that ?o is not in ?b.
11
12 ; --- Other Knowledge State ---
13 (obj_pose_known ?o - object) ; K(HasExactPose(?o))
14 (handempty) ; K(IsEmpty(hand))
15 (holding ?o - object) ; K(IsHolding(?o))
16 ; ... other robot and world state predicates
17 )

Listing 1: PDDL Fluents for K-literal Belief over Boxels

4.4.2 Example PDDLStream Action: Sensing a Boxel

Information gathering is a central part of the framework. The following action allows the robot
to sense a specific Boxel to determine if a target object is present.

1 (:action sense_Boxel_for_object
2 :parameters
3 (?obj - object
4 ?Boxel_target - Boxel_id ; The Boxel to check
5 ?q_sense - robot_config ; Sensing configuration
6 ?obs_status - observation ; Stream output: found / not_found
7 )
8 :precondition
9 (and
10 ; Only sense if location is uncertain for this Boxel
11 (not (obj_in_Boxel ?obj ?Boxel_target))
12 (not (obj_not_in_Boxel ?obj ?Boxel_target))
13 ; PDDLStream calls to find a sensing pose and get the outcome
14 (stream_find_sensing_config ?Boxel_target ?q_sense)
15 (stream_get_sensing_outcome ?obj ?Boxel_target ?q_sense ?obs_status)
16 )
17 :effect
18 (and
19 ; Case 1: Object was found in the target Boxel
20 (when (= ?obs_status found)
21 (and
22 (obj_in_Boxel ?obj ?Boxel_target)
23 (obj_pose_known ?obj)
24 ; We can now infer it's not in any other Boxel.
25 ; This inference is handled by the POD planner's belief update.
26 )
27 )
28 ; Case 2: Object was not found in the target Boxel
29 (when (= ?obs_status not_found)

15

5 Evaluation Plan

30 (and
31 (obj_not_in_Boxel ?obj ?Boxel_target)
32 )
33 )
34 )
35 )

Listing 2: PDDLStream Sensing Action with Belief Update

The associated streams (‘stream_find_sensing_config‘, ‘stream_get_sensing_outcome‘) inter
face with the robot’s motion planners and perception system to ground this symbolic action
in the continuous world. Manipulation actions like ‘pick‘ would similarly be defined, with
preconditions requiring the object’s pose to be known (i.e., ‘(obj_pose_known ?obj)‘ is true).

5 Evaluation Plan

To validate our proposed framework, we will conduct a series of experiments in a simulated
robotic manipulation environment.

5.1 Experimental Setup

• Environment: We will use a physics-based simulation environment, such as PyBullet,
with a multi-degree-of-freedom robotic manipulator (e.g., a Franka Emika Panda arm).
• Tasks: The primary evaluation task will be the ”hidden object” scenario, where the robot
must find and manipulate a target object occluded by other objects. This task is designed
to explicitly require strategic information-gathering actions. We will vary the number of
occluders and the complexity of the scene to test scalability.
• Perception: We will assume access to a perception system that can detect known objects
and estimate their poses from simulated sensor data. This can be implemented via a
stream that interfaces with a library like Bayes3D [11] or a mock perception oracle that
provides pose estimates with simulated uncertainty.

5.2 Evaluation Metrics

To facilitate direct comparison with state-of-the-art approaches, we plan to adopt evaluation
metrics similar to those used for TAMPURA [5]. Performance will be measured based on:

• Success Rate: The percentage of problem instances successfully solved within a given
time limit.
• Planning Time: The wall-clock time required for the planner to find a solution. This
will be a key metric for evaluating the tractability of our approach.

16

5 Evaluation Plan

• Plan Quality / Cost: The length or cost of the executed plan (e.g., number of actions,
total path length of the end-effector). This helps assess the efficiency of the generated
plans.
• Scalability: We will analyze how the above metrics change as the problem complex
ity increases (e.g., by increasing the number of objects, occluders, or the size of the
workspace).

5.3 Baselines for Comparison

The performance of our adaptive Boxel-based POD-TAMP framework will be compared against
several baselines to highlight the specific contributions of our approach:

Uniform Voxelization: A version of our planner that uses a fine-grained, uniform
voxel grid to represent spatial belief, instead of adaptive Boxels. This will directly test the
scalability benefits of our adaptive approach.

Fixed Semantic Regions: A baseline using a fixed, pre-defined set of Critical Regions
(inspired by [20]), to evaluate the advantages of our dynamic, object-centric region
generation.

POMDP-based TAMP (Conceptual/Simplified): If feasible, we will compare against
a simplified implementation or published results of a POMDP-based TAMP system like
TAMPURA [5] on a similar task. This will help contextualize the trade-offs between our
deterministic action approach and a fully probabilistic one.

The goal of this evaluation is to empirically demonstrate whether our proposed framework
offers a scalable and effective solution for TAMP under partial observability, particularly for
tasks that require reasoning about occlusions and information gathering.

5.4 conclusion

This paper presented a novel approach to Task and Motion Planning under partial observability
by integrating a semantic spatial abstraction, termed Boxels, with a Partially Observable Deter
ministic planning framework. The core of our methodology is the adaptive semantic discretiza
tion of the workspace, which provides a scalable and task-relevant representation of spatial
uncertainty. By modeling belief states over these Boxels, our system allows a PDDLStream
based TAMP framework to reason effectively about object locations and occlusions.

The proposed Semantic POD-TAMP model formalizes this integration, enabling the planner to
generate and execute plans that seamlessly combine information-gathering and manipulation
actions. The use of K-literals to represent knowledge within the PDDL state allows for a direct
and conceptually simple integration with existing POD planners. As demonstrated, this enables
the robot to reason about what it knows and where uncertainty lies, and to take actions to
resolve that uncertainty in a targeted manner.

17

5 Evaluation Plan

The expected contribution of this research is a scalable and robust framework for TAMP in
partially known environments. By moving away from exhaustive state-space representations
and leveraging a semantically meaningful abstraction, this work paves the way for more
autonomous and capable robotic systems that can operate effectively in the complexities of the
real world. Future work will focus on extending the variety of semantic information used for
discretization and exploring more complex, multi-robot planning scenarios.

18

List of References

List of References

[1] C. Aeronautiques, A. Howe, C. Knoblock, I. D. McDermott, A. Ram, M. Veloso, D. Weld,
D. W. Sri, A. Barrett, D. Christianson, et al., “Pddl| the planning domain definition
language,” Technical Report, Tech. Rep., 1998.
[2] A. Albore, H. Palacios, and H. Geffner, “A translation-based approach to contingent
planning.,” in IJCAI, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 1623–1628.
[3] B. Bonet, H. Geffner, et al., “Planning under partial observability by classical replan
ning: Theory and experiments,” in IJCAI Proceedings-International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Citeseer, vol. 22, 2011, p. 1936.
[4] B. Bonet and H. Geffner, “Flexible and scalable partially observable planning with linear
translations,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 28,
2014.
[5] A. Curtis, G. Matheos, N. Gothoskar, V. Mansinghka, J. Tenenbaum, T. Lozano-Pérez,
and L. P. Kaelbling, “Partially observable task and motion planning with uncertainty
and risk awareness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10454, 2024.
[6] R. E. Fikes and N. J. Nilsson, “Strips: A new approach to the application of theorem
proving to problem solving,” Artificial intelligence, vol. 2, no. 3-4, pp. 189–208, 1971.
[7] C. R. Garrett, R. Chitnis, R. Holladay, B. Kim, T. Silver, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano
Pérez, “Integrated task and motion planning,” Annual review of control, robotics, and
autonomous systems, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 265–293, 2021.
[8] C. R. Garrett, T. Lozano-Pérez, and L. P. Kaelbling, PDDLStream: Integrating symbolic
planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning, arXiv:1802.08705. Also
in Proc. of ICAPS 2020, 2018. arXiv: 1802.08705.
[9] H. Geffner and B. Bonet, A concise introduction to models and methods for automated
planning. Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2013.
[10] M. Ghallab, D. Nau, and P. Traverso, Automated Planning: theory and practice. Elsevier,
2004.
[11] N. Gothoskar, M. Ghavami, E. Li, A. Curtis, M. Noseworthy, K. Chung, B. Patton, W. T.
Freeman, J. B. Tenenbaum, M. Klukas, V. K. Mansinghka, et al., Bayes3D: Fast learning
and inference in structured generative models of 3d objects and scenes, arXiv:2312.08715,
2023. arXiv: 2312.08715.
[12] D. Hadfield-Menell, E. Groshev, R. Chitnis, and P. Abbeel, “Modular task and motion
planning in belief space,” in 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2015, pp. 4991–4998.
[13] T. Hofmann and H. Geffner, “Learning generalized policies for fully observable non
deterministic planning domains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02499, 2024.

19

List of References

[14] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, “Octomap: An
efficient probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on octrees,” Autonomous robots,
vol. 34, pp. 189–206, 2013.
[15] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and acting in partially
observable stochastic domains,” Artificial intelligence, vol. 101, no. 1-2, pp. 99–134, 1998.
[16] Y. Ma, Y. Yuan, S. Wu, and H. Yuan, “A task and motion planning framework for partially
observable household manipulation scenes,” Advanced Intelligent Systems, p. 2 400 897,
2025.
[17] T. Pan, R. Shome, and L. E. Kavraki, “Task and motion planning for execution in the
real,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2024.
[18] G. Riegler, A. Osman Ulusoy, and A. Geiger, “Octnet: Learning deep 3d representations
at high resolutions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2017, pp. 3577–3586.
[19] M. S. Saleem, R. Veerapaneni, and M. Likhachev, “A pomdp-based hierarchical planning
framework for manipulation under pose uncertainty,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18774,
2024.
[20] N. Shah and S. Srivastava, “Using deep learning to bootstrap abstractions for hierarchical
robot planning,” in Proc. of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (AAMAS ’22), 2022, pp. 1183–1191.
[21] L. Zhao, W. McClinton, A. Curtis, N. Kumar, T. Silver, L. P. Kaelbling, and L. L. Wong,
“Seeing is believing: Belief-space planning with foundation models as uncertainty esti
mators,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03245, 2025.

20